GCP Installation Guide and Resource Reference (#649)
astronomer/docs: astro/install-gcp.md

---
sidebar_label: 'Install Astro on GCP'
title: 'Install Astro on GCP'
id: install-gcp

> description: Get started on Astro by installing your first Astro Cluster on GCP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Get started on Astro by creating your first Astro Cluster on Google Cloud Platform (GCP).
```

---

## Overview

> This guide provides steps for getting started with Astro on your Google Cloud . Below, you'll find instructions for how to complete the Astro install process, including prerequisites and the steps required for our team to provision resources in your network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide provides steps for getting started with Astro on Google Cloud Platform (GCP). Below, you'll find instructions for how to complete the Astro install process, including prerequisites and the steps required for our team to provision resources in your network.
```

Reviewer: What about this section in AWS docs?

> At a high-level, we'll ask that you come prepared with a new AWS account. From there, you can expect to:
> 
> - Create an account on Astro.
> - Share GCP account information with our team.
> - Create a cross-account IAM role that Astro can assume within your new GCP project.
>
> Astronomer will then create a Cluster within your GCP account that hosts the resources and Apache Airflow components necessary to deploy DAGs and execute tasks.

## Prerequisites

To install Astro on GCP, you need:

> - A clean [Google Cloud project](https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects). For security reasons, the install process is not currently supported on an Google Cloud project that has other tooling running in it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A clean [Google Cloud project](https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects). For security reasons, the install process is not currently supported on a Google Cloud project that has other tooling running in it.
```

> - A minimum [CPU](https://cloud.google.com/compute/quotas#cpu_quota) quota of 36.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Google Cloud Shell](https://cloud.google.com/shell).
- A minimum [CPU](https://cloud.google.com/compute/quotas#cpu_quota) quota of 36.
```

> - A minimum [CPU](https://cloud.google.com/compute/quotas#cpu_quota) quota of 36.

Reviewer 2: The Google Cloud Docs call it CPUS (but a minimum CPUS quota reads strange) - thought I'd point it out and you can decide if we call it CPUs or CPU (same for N2_CPU vs N2_CPUS)

- A minimum [N2_CPU](https://cloud.google.com/compute/quotas#cpu_quota) quota of 24.

> - A subscription to the Astro Status Page. This will ensure that you're alerted in the case of an incident or scheduled maintenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A subscription to the [Astro Status Page](https://status.astronomer.io). This will ensure that you're alerted in the case of an incident or scheduled maintenance.
```

> - A subscription to the Astro Status Page. This will ensure that you're alerted in the case of an incident or scheduled maintenance.

Reviewer 2: Astro Status Page should be a href to https://cloud-status.astronomer.io/

For more information about the resources required to run Astro on GCP, see [GCP Resource Reference](resource-reference-gcp.md).

### VPC Peering Prerequisites (Optional)

If any of your GCP resources are on a private network, you can access them using one of the following options:

- Private Services Connect
- A VPC Peering connection between Astronomer's VPC and the VPCs for your broader network

> If you want to access resources using a VPC peering connection additionally need to provide a CIDR block (RFC 1918 IP Space) no smaller than a `/19` range for each of the following services:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to access resources using a VPC peering connection, you additionally need to provide a CIDR block (RFC 1918 IP Space) no smaller than a `/19` range for each of the following services:
```

- **Subnet CIDR**: Used by nodes in your GKE cluster
- **Pod CIDR**: Used by GKE pods
- **Service Address CIDR**: Used by GKE services
- **Service VPC Peering**: Used by Private Service Connections

## Step 1: Access Astro

To begin the Astro install process, first create an account at https://cloud.astronomer.io/.

When you first authenticate to Astro, you can sign in with a Google account, a GitHub account, or an email and password.

<div class="text--center">
  <img src="/img/docs/login.png" alt="Astro login screen" />
</div>

If you're the first person from your team to authenticate, the Astronomer team will add you as a Workspace Admin to a new Workspace named after your Organization. From there, you'll be able to add other team members to that Workspace without Astronomer's assistance.

:::tip

After completing your initial installation, we recommend [setting up an identity provider (IdP)](configure-idp.md) so that users can log in to Astro through your IdP.

:::

> ## Step 2: Activate the Data Plane

Reviewer: I assume there's an intentional reason for these steps to be in slightly different order than AWS?

Reviewer 2: Yes, because there's a lot of work around API activation that needs to be done which doesn't have an AWS equivalent. I had it laid out just like AWS (prerequisites had all the gcp project stuff) and I confused a lot of people who just went straight into the Steps.

> The Data Plane in a core component of Astro that runs in your cloud. It's responsible for provisioning, scaling, and managing the resources required to run your Airflow tasks. To activate the Data Plane on your GCP project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Data Plane is a collection of infrastructure components for Astro that run in your cloud and are fully managed by Astronomer. This includes a central database, storage for Airflow tasks logs, and the resources required for task execution.
 
 To activate the Data Plane on your GCP project:
```

Reviewer: The data plane isn't really "responsible for managing" - we do that, I think let's focus on what things live in it?

1. Run the following commands in your Google Cloud Shell:

    ```sh
    $ gcloud services enable storage-component.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable storage-api.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable compute.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable container.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable deploymentmanager.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable cloudresourcemanager.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable cloudkms.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable sqladmin.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable servicenetworking.googleapis.com
    ```

>     Occasionally, `storage-component.googleapis.com` won't be available after running these commands. If this happens, additionally run the following API call from your Google Cloud Shell:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Occasionally, `storage-component.googleapis.com` won't be available after running these commands. If this happens, run the following API call from your Google Cloud Shell:
```

Reviewer 2: I've gone back and forth on this one as well.  Let me write in long form why I put everything in one step but still added the comment:
- there's NO visual indication that the service account behind storage-component isn't available - you can wait 5 minutes, you can wait 30, no errors pop up - you only realize when the cluster create fails 
- making that curl call is a cheap way to give GCP a kick in the pants and force it to create the service account 
- so, I figured lets just make everyone run the command because we have no guidance to give and its better that they run one extra step than a cluster create fails 
- then I felt guilty and added the comment 

And now in short form:
- lets have the curl command in the sequence of steps; I am ok to just not explain why the curl command is in place

Author: As long as there's no harm in doing the curl command even if it's unneeded, I think that's a good call!

    ```sh
    $ curl \
    https://storage.googleapis.com/storage/v1/projects/$GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT/serviceAccount \
    --header "Authorization: Bearer `gcloud auth application-default print-access-token`"   \
    --header 'Accept: application/json'   --compressed
    ```

2. Run the following commands in your Google Cloud Shell:

    ```sh
    $ export MY_PROJECT_NUMBER=$(gcloud projects describe $GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT --format="value(projectNumber)")
    $ gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding $GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT --member=serviceAccount:$MY_PROJECT_NUMBER@cloudservices.gserviceaccount.com --role=roles/owner
    $ gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding $GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT --member=serviceAccount:astronomer@astro-remote-mgmt-dev.iam.gserviceaccount.com --role=roles/owner
    ```

> ## Step 3: Provide Setup Information with Astronomer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Share Information with Astronomer
```

Author: I should update this in the AWS guide as well, but I saw a comment on Notion that this title could be misinterpreted as "turn on information sharing with Astronomer". I think the new title is more clear, and we should use it in the AWS guide as well.

> Provide Astronomer with the following details about your installation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the GCP account you created as a prerequisite, provide Astronomer with:
```

Author: How about "To start the installation of your first Astro Cluster"? This info has more to do with the Cluster vs the GCP account.

> - Your preferred Astro Cluster name
> - The GCP region that you want to host your Cluster in
> - Your preferred node instance type
> - Your preferred CloudSQL instance type
> - Your preferred maximum node count

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Your preferred Astro Cluster name.
- The GCP region that you want to host your Cluster in.
- Your preferred node instance type.
- Your preferred CloudSQL instance type.
- Your preferred maximum node count.
```

> If you have no preferred values for your first Cluster, Astronomer will create a Cluster with e2-medium-4 nodes, one Medium General Purpose (4vCPU, 16GB) CloudSQL instance, and a maximum node count of 20 in `us-central1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If not specified, Astronomer will create a Cluster with two e2-medium-4 nodes, one Medium General Purpose CloudSQL instance (4vCPU, 16GB), and a maximum node count of 20 in `us-central1`.
```

For information on all supported regions and configurations, see [GCP Resource Reference](resource-reference-gcp.md).  

:::info

> If you need to VPC peer with Astronomer, additionally provide the following information to your Astronomer representative:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to VPC peer with Astronomer, additionally provide the following information to Astronomer:
```

- Subnet CIDRs (RFC 1918 IP Space).
- VPC Name/ID and region for peering with Astronomer.
- The IPs of your DNS servers.

You then need to accept a VPC peering request from Astronomer after Astro is installed. To accept the request, follow [Using VPC Network Peering](https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/using-vpc-peering) in GCP documentation.

Once VPC peered with Astronomer, configure and validate the following to ensure successful network communications between Astro and your resources:

- Egress Routes on Astronomer Route Table
- [Network ACLs](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/access-control/lists) and/or [Security Group](https://cloud.google.com/identity/docs/how-to/update-group-to-security-group) rules of your resources

:::

## Step 4: Let Astronomer Complete the Install

> Once you've provided Astronomer with the information for your setup, the Astronomer team will finish the installation of Astro in GCP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've provided Astronomer with the information for your setup, the Astronomer team will finish creating your first Cluster on GCP.
```

This process can take some time. Wait for confirmation that the installation was successful before proceeding to the next step.

## Step 5: Create a Deployment

> Once Astronomer confirms that your Astro Cluster has been created, you are ready to create a Deployment and start deploying DAGs. Log in to [the Cloud UI](https://cloud.astronomer.io) again and [create a new Deployment](configure-deployment.md). If the installation was successful, your new Astro Cluster will be listed as an option under the **Cluster** menu:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once Astronomer confirms that your Astro Cluster has been created, you are ready to create a Deployment and start deploying DAGs. Log in to [the Cloud UI](https://cloud.astronomer.io) and [create a new Deployment](configure-deployment.md). If the installation was successful, your new Astro Cluster will be listed as an option under the **Cluster** menu:
```

<div class="text--center">
  <img src="/img/docs/create-new-deployment-select-cluster.png" alt="Cloud UI New Deployment screen" />
</div>

:::info Connecting Astro Deployments to External GCP Services

By default, all Deployments have [Workload Identity](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/workload-identity) enabled. This means that you can grant your Deployment access to GCP services such as BigQuery via a service account that's automatically created by Astro.

> To grant your Deployment access to a GCP service, you need to attach an IAM policy the Deployment's service account. All Deployment service accounts are formatted as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To grant your Deployment access to a GCP service, you need to attach an IAM policy to the Deployment's service account. All Deployment service accounts are formatted as follows:
```

```text
astro-<deployment-namespace>@<gcp-project-name>.iam.gserviceaccount.com
```

> You can find a Deployment's namespace in the **Deployments** menu and on the Deployment information screen in the Cloud UI. For example, if your GCP project was called `astronomer-prod-deployment` and your Deployment namespace was `geometrical-gyroscope-9932`, your service account would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find a Deployment's namespace in the Deployment view of the Cloud UI. For example, if your GCP project was called `astronomer-prod-deployment` and your Deployment namespace `geometrical-gyroscope-9932`, your service account would be:
```

---
sidebar_label: 'Install Astro on GCP'
title: 'Install Astro on GCP'
id: install-gcp
description: Get started on Astro by creating your first Astro Cluster on Google Cloud Platform (GCP).
---

## Overview

This guide provides steps for getting started with Astro on Google Cloud Platform (GCP). Below, you'll find instructions for how to complete the Astro install process, including prerequisites and the steps required for our team to provision resources in your network.

At a high-level, we'll ask that you come prepared with a new AWS account. From there, you can expect to:

- Create an account on Astro.
- Create a cross-account IAM role that Astro can assume within your new GCP project.
- Share GCP account information with our team.

Astronomer will then create a Cluster within your GCP account that hosts the resources and Apache Airflow components necessary to deploy DAGs and execute tasks.

## Prerequisites

To install Astro on GCP, you need:

> - A clean [Google Cloud project](https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects). For security reasons, the install process is not currently supported on a Google Cloud project that has other tooling running in it.

Author: ```suggestion
- A clean [Google Cloud project](https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects). For security reasons, the install process is not currently supported on a Google Cloud project that has other tooling running in it.
- [Owner permissions](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/understanding-roles).
```

- A minimum [CPU](https://cloud.google.com/compute/quotas#cpu_quota) quota of 36.
- A minimum [N2_CPU](https://cloud.google.com/compute/quotas#cpu_quota) quota of 24.
- A subscription to the [Astro Status Page](https://status.astronomer.io). This will ensure that you're alerted in the case of an incident or scheduled maintenance.

For more information about the resources required to run Astro on GCP, see [GCP Resource Reference](resource-reference-gcp.md).

### VPC Peering Prerequisites (Optional)

If any of your GCP resources are on a private network, you can access them using one of the following options:

- Private Services Connect
- A VPC Peering connection between Astronomer's VPC and the VPCs for your broader network

If you want to access resources using a VPC peering connection, you additionally need to provide a CIDR block (RFC 1918 IP Space) no smaller than a `/19` range for each of the following services:

- **Subnet CIDR**: Used by nodes in your GKE cluster
- **Pod CIDR**: Used by GKE pods
- **Service Address CIDR**: Used by GKE services
- **Service VPC Peering**: Used by Private Service Connections

## Step 1: Access Astro

> To begin the Astro install process, first create an account at https://cloud.astronomer.io/.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started on Astro, first create an account at https://cloud.astronomer.io/.
```

Doesn't have to be this but trying to change from so much "install" language

    $ gcloud services enable compute.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable container.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable deploymentmanager.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable cloudresourcemanager.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable cloudkms.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable sqladmin.googleapis.com
    $ gcloud services enable servicenetworking.googleapis.com
    $ curl \
    https://storage.googleapis.com/storage/v1/projects/$GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT/serviceAccount \
    --header "Authorization: Bearer `gcloud auth application-default print-access-token`"   \
    --header 'Accept: application/json'   --compressed
    ```

2. Run the following commands in your Google Cloud Shell:

    ```sh
    $ export MY_PROJECT_NUMBER=$(gcloud projects describe $GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT --format="value(projectNumber)")
    $ gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding $GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT --member=serviceAccount:$MY_PROJECT_NUMBER@cloudservices.gserviceaccount.com --role=roles/owner
    $ gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding $GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT --member=serviceAccount:astronomer@astro-remote-mgmt-dev.iam.gserviceaccount.com --role=roles/owner
    ```

> 

Reviewer: @dnarain-astro What is actually happening here? Would it be helpful to add 1 sentence here on what these commands actually do? What about this step is required prior to sharing information with Astronomer?

## Step 3: Provide Setup Information to Astronomer

> To start the installation of your first Astro Cluster, provide Astronomer with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've activated your Data Plane, provide Astronomer with:
```

Feels like the start of every step is "to start the installation" 😅

- Egress Routes on Astronomer Route Table
- [Network ACLs](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/access-control/lists) and/or [Security Group](https://cloud.google.com/identity/docs/how-to/update-group-to-security-group) rules of your resources

:::

## Step 4: Let Astronomer Complete the Install

Once you've provided Astronomer with the information for your setup, the Astronomer team will finish creating your first Cluster on GCP.

This process can take some time. Wait for confirmation that the installation was successful before proceeding to the next step.

## Step 5: Create a Deployment

Once Astronomer confirms that your Astro Cluster has been created, you are ready to create a Deployment and start deploying DAGs. Log in to [the Cloud UI](https://cloud.astronomer.io) and [create a new Deployment](configure-deployment.md). If the installation was successful, your new Astro Cluster will be listed as an option under the **Cluster** menu:

<div class="text--center">
  <img src="/img/docs/create-new-deployment-select-cluster.png" alt="Cloud UI New Deployment screen" />
</div>

> :::info Connecting Astro Deployments to External GCP Services

Reviewer: @dnarain-astro Is this worth being a step? Any reason someone _wouldn't_ do this? How does this information play into this doc: https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/connect-external-services

Author: I actually added this info in the connectivity doc in https://github.com/astronomer/docs/pull/661/files, and I think that's probably the best place to keep it for now - if that PR is approved, I will probably remove this note from the install guide and link out there instead

Because this is technically Deployment setup and not installation setup, I think it doesn't make sense to include as a complete step. Originally added it to this spot because I didn't think we'd have the other PR ready to go for launch.

By default, all Deployments have [Workload Identity](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/workload-identity) enabled. This means that you can grant your Deployment access to GCP services such as BigQuery via a service account that's automatically created by Astro.

To grant your Deployment access to a GCP service, you need to attach an IAM policy to the Deployment's service account. All Deployment service accounts are formatted as follows:

```text
astro-<deployment-namespace>@<gcp-project-name>.iam.gserviceaccount.com
```

You can find a Deployment's namespace in the Deployment view of the Cloud UI. For example, if your GCP project was called `astronomer-prod-deployment` and your Deployment namespace `geometrical-gyroscope-9932`, your service account would be:

```text
astro-geometrical-gyroscope-9932@astronomer-prod-deployment.iam.gserviceaccount.com
```

> For more information about configuring service accounts on GCP, read [GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity#authenticating_to)

Author: ```suggestion
For more information about configuring service accounts on GCP, read [GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity#authenticating_to).
```

## Prerequisites

To install Astro on GCP, you need:

- A clean [Google Cloud project](https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects). For security reasons, the install process is not currently supported on a Google Cloud project that has other tooling running in it.
- [Owner permissions](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/understanding-roles).
- [Google Cloud Shell](https://cloud.google.com/shell).
- A minimum [CPU](https://cloud.google.com/compute/quotas#cpu_quota) quota of 36.
- A minimum [N2_CPU](https://cloud.google.com/compute/quotas#cpu_quota) quota of 24.
- A subscription to the [Astro Status Page](https://status.astronomer.io). This will ensure that you're alerted in the case of an incident or scheduled maintenance.

For more information about the resources required to run Astro on GCP, see [GCP Resource Reference](resource-reference-gcp.md).

### VPC Peering Prerequisites (Optional)

If any of your GCP resources are on a private network, you can access them using one of the following options:

- Private Services Connect
- A VPC Peering connection between Astronomer's VPC and the VPCs for your broader network

> Astro uses 4 different CIDR blocks for creating the infrastructure for your Astronomer Cluster.  If you plan on peering with an existing VPC want to use custom values for your CIDRs, then you must additionally provide your own CIDR ranges (RFC 1918 IP Space) of `/19` or better for the following services:

Reviewer 2: ...existing VPC **and** want to use...[ the word "and" was misisng]

- **Subnet CIDR**: Used by nodes in your GKE cluster, defaults to `172.20.0.0/19`
- **Pod CIDR**: Used by GKE pods, defaults to `172.21.0.0/19`

> - **Service Address CIDR**: Used by GKE services, defaults to `172.21.0.0/19`

Reviewer 2: 172.22.0.0/19 (not .21.)

    --header "Authorization: Bearer `gcloud auth application-default print-access-token`"   \
    --header 'Accept: application/json'   --compressed
    ```

2. Run the following commands in your Google Cloud Shell:

    ```sh
    $ export MY_PROJECT_NUMBER=$(gcloud projects describe $GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT --format="value(projectNumber)")
    $ gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding $GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT --member=serviceAccount:$MY_PROJECT_NUMBER@cloudservices.gserviceaccount.com --role=roles/owner
    $ gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding $GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT --member=serviceAccount:astronomer@astro-remote-mgmt-dev.iam.gserviceaccount.com --role=roles/owner
    ```

## Step 3: Provide Setup Information to Astronomer

To start the installation of your first Astro Cluster, provide Astronomer with:

- Your preferred Astro Cluster name.
- The GCP region that you want to host your Cluster in.
- Your preferred node instance type.
- Your preferred CloudSQL instance type.
- Your preferred maximum node count.
- (_Optional_) Your custom CIDR ranges for connecting to Astronomer's services.

If not specified, Astronomer will create a Cluster with the following resources in `us-central1`:

> - Two `e2-medium-4` nodes.

Reviewer 2: Don't specify a number, just say e2-medium-4 nodes (its actually 3, but with all this worker queue and node pools stuff, the number is changing and just leaving it out is simpler)
